---
title: Working with data on the server
---

### Today

* JSON with servers
* parsing
* radio project work and check-ins

## JSON with servers

JSON is used for storing, sending and receiving data on servers.

If you have data stored in a JavaScript object, you can convert the object into JSON, and send it to a server. In other words, you can save data by SENDing it to a server. (names, passwords, etc).

If you receive data in JSON format, you can convert it into a JavaScript object. In other words, you can GET data from a server.

JavaScript has the command ```JSON.parse()``` to turn JSON data into a Javascript object. By using this command, you can work with the data in your javascript code.

Example data from a server: 

```
'{ "name":"Shane", "age":39, "city":"Los Angeles"}'
```

We use json.parse() to turn it into a Javascript object. The text must be written with proper JSON syntax or you will get an error.

```
var obj = JSON.parse( '{ "name":"Shane", "age":39, "city":"Los Angeles"}' );
```

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<body>

<h2>Create Object from JSON String</h2>

<p id="demo"></p>

<script>
var txt = '{"name":"Shane", "age":39, "city":"Los Angeles"}'
var obj = JSON.parse(txt);
document.getElementById("demo").innerHTML = obj.name + ", " + obj.age;
</script>

</body>
</html>
```

### Sending data to a server

We previously covered parsing text into a JSON object to get data from a server (to display on a website for example).

To send data to a server, we need to convert the data into a string. We do this with JSON.stringify().

Example

```
var obj = { name: "Shane", age: 39, city: "Los Angeles" };

var myJSON = JSON.stringify(obj);
```

### Loading JSON file with Jquery

Jquery gives us methods to make it easier to work with JSON.

A basic getJSON request is formatted as:

```
$.getJSON(url, data, success);
```

The url is local or remote. The *data* is optional, an object or strong sent to the server when requesting data, and success is an optional callback function to execute after the JSON request is successful.

example

```
function success(data) {
  // do something with data, which is an object
}
```

## Finishing our Radio Project

For next week, finish your radio project solo or in a small group.

### Requirements

* Compelling design
* Mobile responsive design
* Uses data fed from an external json file
* Is capable of playing (and switching) radio stations
* Uses the webaudio API

The goal of this project is to complete the creation of your own custom web app for a radio station player. The application should be a unique and compellingly designed radio player that presents the user with a number of stations to select from. Selecting a station should cause the station to begin playing, and any previously selected station should stop. Beyond this, you may add any additional details and design elements you require.
