---
title: Node.js File Systems Module
---

## Today

* File system with node.js
* Final project studio time

# Working with servers

## Working with the file system using Node.js

Node.js comes with a builtin file system module to work with a computer's file system, or for example on a server.  It can **read files, create files, edit files, delete files, and rename files.**

To use it, we must import it.
 
In Node.js we do this with the require statement.

```
let fs = require('fs'); 
```

Note: you may also see this written as ```const fs = require('fs');```

### Reading a file

We can read from a file saved on a server. This can be a text file or a json data file for example. We use the readfile module, part of ```fs```.

```
fs.readFile()
```

Example

**student.json** file:

```json
{
  "name": "Layla",
  "age": 22,
  "department": "Math and Computer Science"
}
```

**script.js** file

```js
let fs = require('fs');

fs.readFile('student.json', function(err,data) {  
    if (err) throw err;
    let student = JSON.parse(data);
    console.log(student);
});

console.log('This is after the read call.'); 
```

These two files are in the same directory. We can run our script with ```node script.js```

Doing so will print out:

```
This is after the read call.
{ name: 'Layla',
age: 22,
department: 'Math and computer Science' }
```

Since Javascript is asynchronous, we start reading the student.json file, and we have a callback function to run when finished. In the meantime, we print to the console in the last line of our script. Our readFile finally finishes and triggers the anonymous callback function to run that parses our student json data and prints it out. 

### Writing to a file

You can create a new text file in the file system with ```fs.writeFile()```. If the file already exists, it will overwire the previous content.

You can also add text to the end of a file using ```fs.appendFile()```. This has the advantage of not overwriting a file, and if it doesn't already exist, it will create the file first.

```js
let fs = require('fs');

let myText = "This text and the random number "+Math.random()*100+" will be added to the end of the file. ";

fs.appendFile('textFile.txt', myText, function (err) {
  if (err) throw err;
  console.log('Saved to textFile.txt!');
});
```

Again, we can save this as a script file and run it with ```node script.js``` or whatever we've named the file.

### Resources

- Node.js [File System](https://www.w3schools.com/nodejs/nodejs_filesystem.asp) tutorial
- Node.js [modules](https://www.w3schools.com/nodejs/ref_modules.asp)

## In-class studio time

- 1-on-1 meetings

# Final Project

This semester we have built websites for our class, false or misleading institutional websites, personalized clock programs, custom web extensions that modify the browser, an experimental weather web application. 

We've covered 'frontend' programming including HTML, CSS and Javascript, modifying the DOM, as well as working with servers on the backend, creating and deploying node-based web applications with interaction, data persistence and data/API queries.

For this assignment you will make a custom web application, either your own idea, or building from the radio program we began in class.

# Goals:
* the site should be responsive - it must work well on the desktop and mobile browsers
* the site should have interactive elements - you will want to use javascript
* the design should be compelling and unique - no cookie cutter sites. Question what the site is, the conventions of such sites, and make it your own!
* the site should be well-executed and original
* Consider how your site works with data and APIs.

**Final projects must be uploaded to the web by Wednesday May 15 at 3pm. Project presentations will be in class on May 8 3PM.** We will have a series of smaller steps to accomplish leading up to that.

# Example unique web apps

* [touched-some1](http://touched-some1.com) - For Underneath The Skin
* [Follower](http://follower.today) - art/performance project and commentary
* [Binky](http://binky.rocks) - App/Artwork
* [somebody app](http://somebodyapp.com) - App/performance project?

# Homework

Get a first prototype ready!

Write a development log of half a page.

* What are/were your goals for the session?
* What did you spend your time on during your work session(s)?
* What worked?
* Where are you stuck?
* What are your next steps?
* How does this fit into the overall project idea so far?

